Now in the previous lecture
I did add some environment variables
and provide some values for them.
And I did create that cloud database here,
which I'll use here
to really show you how this works in action.
But I'm not fully finished
with this Workflow definition file yet.
Because there are some parts of that file
that still must be added, for example, down here,
this command in the end makes sure that the
server, the web server, is started and it must be started
in order to run the tests thereafter.
But this part is then important to make sure
that the next steps can be executed
without shutting down the server first.
And here I must enter the port of the web server.
So the port on which I'm listening.
Now of course the port is dynamic.
I do set it here with this environment variable.
So therefore, this environment variable is not just used
in my code and configuration files.
It's also used to write in here
in this Workflow definition file.
And that's not uncommon, that you have some environment
variables that also must be used
inside of the Workflow definition file.
And thankfully, using environment variables in there
is quite straightforward as well.
Whenever you need to use an environment variable
in such a run instruction, you can interpolate it
by using dollar sign and then the name
of the environment variable, in this case port.
Now the exact syntax can be different
if you're using a different shell here.
If you're running this on a Windows machine, for example
instead of a Linux machine as I'm doing it.
But for a Linux, this is the syntax you use
in a default shell to interpolate
and output the value of an environment variable.
On Windows where the PowerShell is used by default,
this would be the syntax you use instead, for example.
In general, you can also use the Shell key when
defining a step to switch from the default operating shell
to a different one. For example, instead of using Bash,
which is the default on non-Windows platforms,
you could switch to Python to execute all your commands
as Python commands.
And therefore, if you are switching to a different shell,
by adding this shell key to your steps, you might need to
change the syntax for interpolating environment variables,
but in that case, the official shell documentation
is the place to go.
So here on Ubuntu latest in that default shell
this is the syntax for interpolating
and outputting an environment variable.
But there also is another way of getting access
to an environment variable value
in your Workflow definition file.
And we can take a look at this way down here,
where I wanna output the value of an environment variable.
For example, let's say here, I wanna say MONGODB_USERNAME.
So this is just some text here,
with that I'm not outputting anything, but thereafter
I want to output the MONGODB_username environment
variable value, which should be maximilian in my case.
I could of course, again, interpolate it like this.
That's what we saw before already.
But we can also use that other syntax we already saw before
in the course, this expression syntax here
and access a specific environment-variable context object
provided by GitHub, and that's the env object.
So just as we had the steps and the needs
and the GitHub objects in earlier course sections,
here we have the env object which gives us access
to all the environment variables that are available
in this job or in this step here.
And therefore here I could access
env.MONGODB_USERNAME to output that value.
So that's how we can output it, and I'll also repeat
this down there in that other job also to show you
that here some values will not be available
because these are job specific environment variables.
This on the other hand here is a Workflow environment
variable, so that value should be available here.
If I output MONGODB_NAME, for example, with interpolation
or by using the env context object, doesn't matter.
This value here should be available, this here
should not be available in this job.
So that's how we can output these values, how
we can use them in this file and how we can define them so
that they are also available in the code that's executed
in this environment.
So that's executed on this job's runner.
And therefore, with all of that out of the way,
this database created and the network settings configured
as shown before, this should all work and we're ready to
create a commit and push this to a remote repository.
So therefore, here, I'll initialize this and then
add my commit where I say initial commit, for example.
And now I just need a remote repository.
So therefore here I'm back in my GitHub account
and I will create a new repository gha-env.
It will be a public repository because later I want to show
you a feature that requires a public repository.
And with that, I'll create it.
And then as always, grab that URL and add this as a remote.
And then push this, with help of this command
which is required initially.
So now this is pushed, and since I have a push trigger here
that should of course also lead to this action
being executed.
And it looks like I have an error in my YAML syntax
in line 32.
Yeah, let's move this to new line by writing it like this,
so that this is interpreted correctly again.
Fixed syntax and push this,
and now this should execute.
Here we go.
And now I'll wait for this execution to finish
and see whether everything works as intended
to then see how these environment variables were used.
So here for me, this all finished successfully.
If it failed for you
make sure that you did create your database correctly,
that you did allow all IP addresses to connect
and that you are using the correct credentials
for your environment variable values.
And if I now inspect my jobs, you see that first of all
obviously the environment variables were injected
in the code, otherwise the server wouldn't have
started successfully.
So it was able to connect to the database and that's only
possible if the environment variable values were provided.
So that obviously worked.
And we can also see that under output information,
I am outputting that MONGODB username and that is that value
that is provided in the Workflow file.
Under deploy on the other hand, we see that there
I'm not able to output the MONGODB username.
There is no value here,
because this job doesn't have access to this username.
Because if we take a look at our Workflow file again
then this deploy job has no job-specific environment
variables and also no step-specific environment variables.
And the environment variables of the other job
won't be available here.
Therefore, it only has access to the Workflow
environment variables, which in this case is only this one
and therefore that environment variable
and it's value is also output successfully.
But the other environment variable, which is only defined
in the other job, is not output successfully.
But this shows us how environment variables can be set
and how they can be used.